The Project Gutenberg eBook of The fairy flute
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The fairy flute

Author: Rose Fyleman

Release date: June 19, 2025 [eBook #76340]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Methuen & Co. Ltd, 1921

Credits: Tim Miller, Matthew Everett and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAIRY FLUTE ***


                          Transcriber’s Notes

 ● A stanza break was inserted at the start of page 25 before "But ere
   the morning has well begun"
 ● Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
 ● Typographical errors were silently corrected.
 ● Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only when
   a predominant form was found in this book.
 ● Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FAIRY FLUTE




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         BY THE SAME AUTHOR

                           FAIRIES AND CHIMNEYS
                           THE FAIRY GREEN




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FAIRY FLUTE




                                   BY

                              ROSE FYLEMAN
                    AUTHOR OF “FAIRIES AND CHIMNEYS”




                             SECOND EDITION




                           METHUEN & CO. LTD.
                          36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                 LONDON




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                  _First Published_ _October 6th 1921_
                  _Second Edition_        _1922_




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                TO _ALL_

                         MY NEPHEWS AND NIECES




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS

                                                   PAGE
                CONSOLATION                           9
                IF YOU MEET A FAIRY                  11
                FAIRY LORE                           13
                EVERY FAIRY HAS A STAR               15
                THE FAIRY LOVER                      17
                THE FAIRY TAILOR                     19
                AT DAWN                              22
                THE GREEN LOCH                       24
                THE SKYLARK                          26
                IN BOND STREET                       28
                TIMOTHY                              29
                FAIRY LULLABY FOR A MORTAL           31
                THE CANARY                           33
                RAINY MORNING                        35
                THIS IS THE WAY THE FAIRIES SING     37
                THE FAIRY BALL                       39
                USEFUL HINTS                         40
                THE FAIRY FLUTE                      41
                THE APPLE-TREE                       43
                A STRANGE PAIR                       44
                THE WILLOW PRINCESSES                46
                A VISITOR                            47
                THE LITTLE PRINCE                    48
                TEMPER                               49
                BEST                                 51
                WHAT I SHALL BE                      52
                SOMETIMES                            53
                PREPARE!                             55
                A VOYAGE                             56
                A COMPLAINT                          58
                THE FAIRIES GIVE THANKS              60




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FAIRY FLUTE




                              CONSOLATION


       You may be very ugly and freckledy and small
       And have a little stubby nose that’s not a nose at all;
       You may be bad at spelling and you may be worse at sums,
       You may have stupid fingers that your Nanna says are thumbs,
       And lots of things you look for you may never, never find,
       But if you love the fairies—you don’t mind.

       You may be rather frightened when you read of wolves and bears
       Or when you pass the cupboard-place beneath the attic stairs;
       You may not always like it when thunder makes a noise
       That seems so much, much bigger than little girls and boys;
       You may feel rather lonely when you waken in the night,
       But if the fairies love you—_it’s all right_.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          IF YOU MEET A FAIRY


                     If you meet a fairy
                     Don’t run away;
                     She won’t want to hurt you,
                     She’ll only want to play.

                     Show her round the garden,
                     Round the house too,
                     She’ll want to see the kitchen
                     (I know they always do).

                     Find a tiny present
                     To give her when she goes,
                     They love silver paper
                     And little ribbon bows.

                     I knew a little girl once
                     Who saw twenty-three
                     Playing in the orchard
                     As jolly as could be.

                     They asked her to dance with them
                     To make a twenty-four;
                     She ran to the nursery
                     And hid behind the door.

                     Hid behind the nursery door—
                     (What a thing to do!)
                     She grew up very solemn
                     And rather ugly too.

                     If you meet a fairy
                     Remember what I say,
                     Talk to her nicely
                     And don’t run away.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               FAIRY LORE


        Fairies learn to dance before they learn to walk;
        Fairies learn to sing before they learn to talk;
        Fairies learn their counting from the cuckoo’s call;
            They do not learn Geography at all.

        Fairies go a-riding with witches on their brooms
        And steal away the rainbows to brighten up their rooms;
        Fairies like a sky-dance better than a feast;
            They have a birthday once a week at least.

        Fairies think the rain as pretty as the sun;
        Fairies think that trespass-boards are only made for fun;
        Fairies think that peppermint’s the nicest thing they know;
            I _always_ take a packet when I go.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         EVERY FAIRY HAS A STAR


                Every fairy has a star
                Where all her tiny treasures are,
                And there her faithful gnome,
                As soon as she goes out at night
                Against the window sets a light
                To guide his lady home.

                And at the open door he stands
                And waves his little twinkling hands
                As down to earth she goes;
                Then sits and waits the long night through,
                And sometimes sings a song or two
                And sometimes has a doze.

                But at the earliest crow of cock
                Back to the sky the fairies flock,
                And at their doors they stand and knock
                (The air is keen and chill)—
                They do not wait to see the sun;
                Straight to their little beds they run;
                The stars are darkened one by one
                And all the sky is still.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FAIRY LOVER


            You walk in your orchard, you sit in your bower
            Mid plentiful treasure of fruit and of flower;
            But you shall have pleasaunces brighter than these,
            With magical blossoms and magical trees.

            Your train is of damask, rich fold upon fold,
            Your gown is of crimson, your shoes are of gold;
            But a mantle of rainbows shall wrap you about,
            Besprinkled with star-dust within and without.

            Your ladies-in-waiting are gracious and fair
            And a little page stands by the side of your chair;
            But an army of goblins shall do your behest
            And fly at your bidding to East and to West.

            You shall sit on a cushion of velvety moss,
            Embroidered with sunbeams across and across,
            And a grasshopper chorus shall make you good cheer
            Or charm you with delicate lullabies, dear.

            I will tap at your window some moon-silvered night,
            And when you lean down through the jessamine white
            My fairy-swift wings I shall softly unfurl
            And bear you away to my palace of pearl.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FAIRY TAILOR


        Sitting on the flower-bed beneath the hollyhocks
        I spied the tiny tailor who makes the fairies’ frocks;
        There he sat a-stitching all the afternoon
        And sang a little ditty to a quaint wee tune:
          “Grey for the goblins, blue for the elves,
          Brown for the little gnomes that live by themselves,
          White for the pixies that dance upon the green—
          But where shall I find me a robe for the Queen?”

        All about the garden his little men he sent,
        Up and down and in and out unceasingly they went.
        Here they stole a blossom, there they pulled a leaf,
        And bound them up with gossamer into a glowing sheaf.
          Petals of the pansy for little velvet shoon,
          Silk of the poppy for a dance beneath the moon,
          Lawn of the jessamine, damask of the rose,
          To make their pretty kirtles and airy furbelows.

        Never roving pirates back from Southern seas
        Brought a store of treasures home beautiful as these.
        They heaped them all about him in a sweet gay pile,
        But still he kept a-stitching and a-singing all the while:
          “Grey for the goblins, blue for the elves,
          Brown for the little gnomes that live by themselves,
          White for the pixies that dance on the green,
          But who shall make a royal gown to deck the Fairy Queen?”




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                AT DAWN


                      Though the fairies meet by night
                        In the moonlit spaces,
                      Often in the morning light
                        You will see their traces;
                      If you rise at early dawn
                        When the birds are waking,
                      You may find upon the lawn
                        Tents of fairy making.

                      In the meadows here and there,
                        Where the soft wind passes,
                      Elfin lines of gossamer
                        Stretch between the grasses;
                      And if you will look about
                        Soon you will discover
                      Fairy washing hanging out
                        All among the clover.

                      In the quiet woods you might,
                        If your ways be wary,
                      Even hope to get a sight
                        Of a little fairy
                      On a lily-leaf, perchance,
                        Broad and smooth and level,
                      Practising her tiny dance
                        For the evening revel.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE GREEN LOCH


              Far in the hills the Green Loch lies,
              Its constant emerald mocks at the skies;
              Though they be garmented grey or blue
              Never the Green Loch changes hue;
              For at earliest dawn, when the winds are still,
              Over the brow of the western hill
              The fairies come in a happy throng
              With elfin laughter and elfin song
              Trooping down to the water-side
              To bathe in its cool enchanted tide.
              Over and under they flash about,
              They race with the shy little silver trout,
              They twist and tumble and dart and dive
              Till all the lake is alight and alive,
              And glows with a tremulous sparkling sheen
              Like the jewelled robe of an Eastern queen.

              But ere the morning has well begun
              They all come leaping forth to the sun.
              They hang for a shimmering moment there
              Shaking their curls in the warm bright air,
              While the water drops from their delicate wings
              And dapples the lake with quivering rings,
              Then rise like thistledown over the trees
              And float away on the heather-sweet breeze.

              They leave not a sign, they leave not a trace,
              A slumberous calm lies over the place;
              Only the green, green waters bide
              To tell the secret they never can hide.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE SKYLARK


    Of all the birds the fairies love the skylark much the best;
    They come with little fairy gifts to seek his hidden nest.
    They praise his tiny slender feet and silken suit of brown,
    And with their gentle hands they smooth his feathers softly down.

    They cluster round with glowing cheeks and bright expectant eyes,
    Waiting the moment that shall bring the freedom of the skies;
    Waiting the double-sweet delight that only he can give—
    (Oh, kings might surely spurn their crowns to live as fairies live).

    To ride upon a skylark’s back between his happy wings,
    To float upon the edge of heaven and listen while he sings—
    The dreams of mortals scarce can touch so perfected a bliss,
    And even fairies could not know a greater joy than this.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             IN BOND STREET


                 Upon her little velvet hat
                   A silken tassel hung,
                 And to the very end of that
                   A tiny fairy clung.

                 Among her curls he bobbed about
                   And played at hide-and-seek
                 With every dimple that came out
                   Upon her chin or cheek.

                 This is a common sight perchance
                   For Londoners to see?
                 It seemed to draw no curious glance
                   From anyone but me.

                 Along the street I watched her go
                   Serenely unaware;
                 And still he tumbled to and fro
                 (It seemed so strange she should not know)
                   Among her golden hair.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                TIMOTHY


         My cat Timothy who has such lovely eyes
         Is really not a cat at all; it’s only a disguise.
         A witch cast a spell on him a long time since
         And changed him to a pussy-cat; but once he was a Prince.

         On warm clear nights when a big moon is out
         He steps into the garden and never turns about,
         But walks down the path with his quiet proud air—
         He knows that the fairies are waiting out there.

         The fairies go a-dancing, a-dancing in a ring,
         He sits in the middle with a crown like a king,
         High on a throne in the middle of the grass,
         And the fairies stop capering to curtsey as they pass.

         Some day, some day when the spell is done
         He will be a Prince again. _Won’t_ that be fun?
         He will come to seek me and kiss my lily hand
         And take me on his foaming steed to reign in fairyland.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       FAIRY LULLABY FOR A MORTAL


              Sleep, oh sleep, for the night is still;
              The friendly moon peers over the hill;
              Cradled soft on the bosom of night
              Smiling she scatters her wistful light
              Where fairy lovers their trystings keep;
              But the children of men must sleep, must sleep.

              Sleep, oh sleep, for your days are long;
              The stars shall sing you a slumber-song
              Clear and bright as their silver flames,
              All made up of their own sweet names,
              Falling softly from star to star—
              Mera, Murphid and Aladfar.

              Sleep, oh sleep; with never a sound
              We will circle mazily round and around;
              We will wrap you close in a web of dreams
              Shot with delicate fairy gleams;
              With our soft, soft wings we will brush away
              The sorrowful darkness that comes with the day.

              Sleep, oh sleep, for the night grows late;
              Over the hill our comrades wait.
              How can we go when the gifts we brought,
              For all our loving, have served you nought?
              How can we leave you and know you weep?
              Will you not hush you, and smile, and sleep?




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE CANARY


                   He used to be a fairy once,
                     A little singing fairy;
                   He would not work, he would not play,
                   He only sat and sang all day—
                     So now he’s a canary.

                   They sent him out of fairyland,
                     They sent him here to me
                   The day that I was six years old;
                   His little house of shining gold
                     Hangs in the nursery.

                   He’s taught me lots of lovely things
                     I never should have guessed;
                   He’s told me what they say and do
                   (They all have wings—it’s really true)
                     And how the Queen is dressed.

                   He flits about the house at night
                     A little lonely fairy;
                   But nobody is there to see,
                   And no one knows—excepting me—
                     He’s not a real canary.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             RAINY MORNING


                 As I was walking in the rain
                 I met a fairy down a lane.
                 We walked along the road together,
                 I soon forgot about the weather.
                 He told me lots of lovely things:
                 The story that the robin sings,
                 And where the rabbits go to school,
                 And how to know a fairy pool,
                 And what to say and what to do
                 If bogles ever bother you.

                 The flowers peeped from hedgy places
                 And shook the raindrops from their faces,
                 And furry creatures all the way
                 Came popping out and said “Good-day.”
                 But when we reached the little bend,
                 Just where the village houses end,
                 He seemed to slip into the ground,
                 And when I looked about I found
                 The rain was suddenly all over
                 And the sun shining on the clover.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                    THIS IS THE WAY THE FAIRIES SING


             This is the way the fairies sing:
             They all stand round in a shining ring
             On quiet nights when the moon is high,
             And lift their faces up to the sky.
             They read the music out of the stars,
             There aren’t any notes and there aren’t any bars.
             And sweet their song as the clover flower,
             And soft it is as a summer shower,
             And gay as leaves that the June airs shake,
             And sad as the mist on an autumn lake.
             None shall light on a lovelier thing
             Than the magical song that the fairies sing.

             This is the way the fairies dance:
             They point their toes and they leap and prance
             Over and under and round and round,
             Now in the air and now on the ground,
             In a shimmering, glimmering moon-lit maze
             To a wonderful music that nobody plays.
             And swift their dance as the coming of spring,
             And light as the touch of a butterfly’s wing,
             And strange as the gleams in a stormy sky
             And changing-bright as the peacock’s dye.
             Oh, lucky are you if you get the chance
             To learn the way that the fairies dance.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE FAIRY BALL


                “I am asked to the ball to-night, to-night;
                What shall I wear, for I must look right?”
                “Search in the fields for a lady-smock;
                Where could you find you a prettier frock?”

                “I am asked to the ball to-night, to-night;
                What shall I do for my jewels bright?”
                “Trouble you not for a brooch or a ring,
                A daisy-chain is the properest thing.”

                “I am asked to the ball to-night, to-night;
                What shall I do if I shake with fright?”
                “When you are there you will understand
                That no one is frightened in Fairyland.”




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              USEFUL HINTS


                   Fairy flannel is the skin of peaches,
                   Fairy brushes are the nuts of beeches,
                   Velvet bulrushes are fairy pillows,
                   Fairy muffs are made of pussy-willows.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FAIRY FLUTE


                      My brother has a little flute
                      Of gold and ivory,
                      He found it on a summer night
                      Within a hollow tree.
                      He plays it every morning
                      And every afternoon,
                      And all the little singing-birds
                      Listen to the tune.
                      He plays it in the meadows,
                      And everywhere he walks
                      The flowers start a-nodding
                      And dancing on their stalks.
                      He plays it in the village,
                      And all along the street
                      The people stop to listen,
                      The music is so sweet.
                      And none but he can play it
                      And none can understand,
                      Because it is a fairy flute
                      And comes from Fairyland.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE APPLE-TREE


                     I stood beneath the apple-tree,
                     The apples were so good to see;
                     Very high above my head
                     I saw them shining round and red.

                     A robin sang a tiny song,
                     And after I had waited long
                     A fairy in the apple-tree
                     Threw an apple down to me.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             A STRANGE PAIR


             The witch, the witch that lives in the wood
             Is not very pretty and not very good;
             Her face is brown and her eyes are black,
             A fierce old pussy-cat sits on her back
             With a sharp thin tail sticking up like a spire,
             While her mistress crouches over the fire,
             Be the day cold or be the day hot,
             Watching her strange little bubbling pot.

             The gobliny dwarf that lives on the hill
             He lies in the heather so still, so still.
             But on big dark nights when there isn’t a moon
             He puts on his cloak and his dancing shoon
             And runs along like a soft shy mouse
             Till he comes to the door of the witch’s house.
             “Ho!” he cries, “it is junketing weather”;
             And off they go on the spree together.

             Off they go on the tail of the wind:
             The great black pussy-cat sails behind.
             Haven’t you heard them banging about?
             Haven’t you heard them whistle and shout?
             Haven’t you seen them now and again
             Peering in at the window-pane?
             Oh, but I tell you it’s better to hide
             When the witch and the goblin are out for a ride.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         THE WILLOW PRINCESSES


            The tall princesses in the willow tree
            They move their lazy, lovely heads about,
            They wave their arms, their hair goes streaming out,
            Their rustling dresses shimmer like the sea.

            But presently they cease to sway and swing
            And stand quite still, and whisper gentle words,
            Quietly calling to the little birds
            To perch upon their pretty hands and sing.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               A VISITOR


    I heard a little tiny noise behind the cupboard door
    And something soft and small and quick flashed right across the
       floor.
    The day had very nearly gone and I could hardly see;
    I do so wish that it would come again to visit me;
    The whole day long I’ve looked and looked and looked about the
       house,
    _I_ think it was a fairy. _Nurse_ thinks it was a mouse.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE LITTLE PRINCE


           My mother is a queen and my father is a king
           And I have a garden with pretty birds that sing,
           Where pansies and marigolds and hollyhocks grow
           And four little apple-trees planted in a row.

           My father is a king and my mother is a queen
           And I have a little page dressed all in green,
           A treasure-mine in Barbary, an orange-grove in Spain,
           And a little brown monkey on a long gold chain.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 TEMPER


                “Blow out the light,” they said, they said
                  (She’d got to the very last page);
                “Blow out the light,” they said, they said,
                “It’s dreadfully wicked to read in bed”;
                Her eyes grew black and her face grew red
                  And she blew in a terrible rage.

                She put out the moon, she did, she did,
                  So frightfully hard she blew,
                She put out the moon, she did, she did;
                Over the sky the darkness slid,
                The stars all scuttled away and hid—
                  (A very wise thing to do).

                But please don’t whisper the tale about,
                  She’d get into trouble, she would;
                Please don’t whisper the tale about,
                If anyone else should ever find out
                She’d get into trouble without a doubt,
                  And now she’s _ever_ so good.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  BEST


                  I like to wear my party frock
                  That Auntie bought in town,
                  My patent shoes with shiny toes,
                  My Sunday hat with little bows,
                  And ribbons hanging down.
                  I like to hear the people say:
                  “How pretty Nancy looks to-day!”

                  But Daddy shakes his head and says:
                  “You’ll make her very vain.”
                  And Grannie says: “She should be dressed
                  In everything that’s of the best
                  But rather neat and plain.”
                  And Mother says: “My goodness me!
                  Who _can_ this lovely lady be?”




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            WHAT I SHALL BE


                      I shall be a lady
                      As pretty as you please,
                      And I shall have a garden
                      With lots of flowers and trees,
                      A pretty little kitchen
                      With rows of shining pots,
                      A hothouse full of peaches
                      And a nursery full of cots.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               SOMETIMES


      Some days are fairy days. The minute that you wake
      You have a magic feeling that you never could mistake;
      You may not see the fairies, but you know that they’re about,
      And any single minute they might all come popping out;
      You want to laugh, you want to sing, you want to dance and run,
      Everything is different, everything is fun;
      The sky is full of fairy clouds, the streets are fairy ways—
      _Anything_ might happen on truly fairy days.

      Some nights are fairy nights. Before you go to bed
      You hear their darling music go chiming in your head;
      You look into the garden, and through the misty grey
      You see the trees all waiting in a breathless kind of way.
      All the stars are smiling; they know that very soon
      The fairies will come singing from the land behind the moon.
      If only you could keep awake when Nurse puts out the light...
      _Anything_ might happen on a truly fairy night.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREPARE!


                     Bunny, bunny, smooth your fur,
                       Wash your little face;
                     Dormouse, wake you up and stir
                       Lest you lose your place.
                     Hasten, squirrel, don’t be shy—
                     The Queen is coming by.

                     Linnets, wrens, be ready, please,
                       With your sweetest notes,
                     Perch among the waiting trees,
                       Tune your tiny throats.
                     Skylark, won’t you leave the sky?
                     The Queen is coming by.

                     Goblins, stop your naughty tricks,
                       Hold yourselves in wait;
                     Witches, raise your besom sticks
                       For an arch of state.
                     Quickly, fairies, hither fly—
                     The Queen is coming by.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                A VOYAGE


                  They took me out a-sailing—
                  The boat was made of glass;
                  We sailed upon the little clouds,
                  The stars came out in shining crowds
                  So thick we scarce could pass.
                  But feather-light through all the night
                  About the sky we sped;
                  There were no oars with which to row,
                  There was no tiniest wind to blow
                  Though all the sails were spread.

                  They took me out a-sailing—
                  We anchored by the moon;
                  The golden door was open wide,
                  We saw a garden-ground inside
                  Where it was light as noon.
                  And fairy folk looked out and spoke:
                  “Come in, come in and play!”
                  We climbed a little silver stair—
                  It was so beautiful in there
                  I wished that I might stay.

                  They took me out a-sailing—
                  Oh, strange the tales I heard
                  Of charmed adventures in the skies
                  Beyond the gaze of human eyes,
                  Beyond the flight of bird.
                  The stars went out, I looked about,
                  I saw the dewdrops gleam
                  Among the cobwebs on the lawn
                  As we came home at break of dawn...
                  It was not all a dream.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              A COMPLAINT


                 You’ve stolen all our mushrooms!
                 When friends come in to tea
                 In Fairyland it is the rule
                 To offer them a satin stool;
                 The grass is often very wet
                 And furniture is hard to get,
                 As you must all agree.

                 You’ve stolen all our mushrooms
                 And left not one behind.
                 If people came by night and day
                 And took your prettiest chairs away
                 And made them all into a stew
                 Without so much as thanking you,
                 Now would you call it kind?

                 You’ve stolen all our mushrooms,
                 And, if you don’t take care,
                 We’ll go about the fields at night
                 And paint the toadstools brown and white,
                 And you’ll be punished for your greed
                 By being very ill indeed—
                 So you had best beware.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        THE FAIRIES GIVE THANKS


            To all kind folk who make delightful gardens
                    Where we may live,
            Enjoying days and nights of busy leisure
            Amid devices fashioned for our pleasure,
                    Our thanks we give.

            For dancing-lawns and gravelled jousting-places,
                    For guardian trees,
            For ferny thickets strewn with moss-grown mountains
            And lily-pools and waterfalls and fountains—
                    For all of these.

            Charged are we also by our little comrades
                    The gentle birds,
            That we their messages of thanks should bring you,
            Since they from grateful hearts can only sing you
                    Songs without words.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




           The author’s best thanks are due to the Editor and
           Proprietors of _Punch_, through whose courtesy she
           is able to include in this collection a number of
           verses which have already appeared in that paper.




              PRINTED BY MORRISON AND GIBB LTD., EDINBURGH

------------------------------------------------------------------------





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAIRY FLUTE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


